-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION AND RELATIONAL DATABASES NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter 1.1 Database-System Applications
  - Lots or real world uses.

Chapter 1.2 Purpose of Database Systems
  - Before database management systems (DBMSs) were introduced, organizations usually stored information in a file-processing system.
  - Disadvantages (file-processing system):
    1. Data redundancy and inconsistency
    2. Difficulty accessing data
        -  Conventional file-processing environments do not allow needed data to be retrieved in a convenient and efﬁcient manner
    3. Data isolation
    4. Integrity problems
    5. Atomicity problems
        - atomic—it must happen in its entirety or not at all.
    6. Concurrent-access anomalies
    7. Security problems

Chapter 1.3 View of Data

Chapter 1.3.1 Data Abstraction
  - Physical level
    - How data is actually stored.
  - Logical Level
    - What data is stored in the DB and the relationships.
  - View Level
    - The highest level of abstraction describes only part of the entire database.

Chapter 1.3.2 Instances and Schemas
  - The collection of information stored in the DB at a particular moment is called an instance of the DB.

Chapter 1.4 Database Languages

Chapter 1.5 Relational Databases

Chapter 1.7 Data Storage and Querying
  - The query processor is important because it helps the database system to simplify and facilitate access to data.

Chapter 1.7.1 Storage Manager
  - The storage manager is the component of a database system that provides the interface between the low-level data stored in the database and the application programs and queries submitted to the system.
  - The storage manager components include
    1. Authorization and integrity manager : tests for the satisfaction of integrity constraints and checks the authority of users to access data.
    2. Transaction manager : ensures that the database remains in a consistent (correct) state despite system failures, and that concurrent transaction executions proceed without conﬂicting.
    3. File manager : manages the allocation of space on disk storage and the data structures used to represent information stored on disk.
    4. Buffer manager : responsible for fetching data from disk storage into main memory, and deciding what data to cache in main memory.

Chapter 1.7.2 The Query Processor
  - The query processor components include:
    1. DDL interpreter, which interprets DDL statements and records the deﬁnitions in the data dictionary.
    2. DML compiler, which translates DML statements in a query language into an evaluation plan consisting of low-level instructions that the query evaluation engine understands.
       Also performs query optimizations.
    3. Query evaluation engine, which executes low-level instructions generated by the DML compiler.

Chapter 1.8 Transaction Management
  - all-or-none requirement : atomicity.
  - correctness requirement : consistency.
  - persistence requirement : durability.
  - A transaction is a collection of operations that performs a single logical function in a database application.
  - Database must preform failure recovery in the event that a system failure occurs that restores the DB to previous state.
  - It is the responsibility of the concurrency-control manager to control the interaction among the concurrent transactions
  - The transaction manager consists of the concurrency-control manager and the recovery manager.

Chapter 1.9 Database Architecture
  - Most users of a database system today are not present at the site of the database system, but connect to it through a network.
  - Client machines, on which remote database users work, and server machines
  - In a two-tier architecture, the application resides at the client machine, where it invokes database system functionality at the server machine
  - In two-tier architectures application program interface standards like ODBC and JDBC are used for interaction between the client and the server.
  - In a three-tier architecture, the client machine acts as merely a front end and does not contain any direct database calls.
  - Three-tier applications are more appropriate for large applications, and for applications that run on the World Wide Web.

Chapter 1.10 Data Mining and Information Retrieval
  - The term data mining refers loosely to the process of semi automatically analyzing large databases to ﬁnd useful patterns.
  - Data warehouses gather data from multiple sources under a uniﬁed schema, at a single site.

Chapter 1.11 Specialty Databases

Chapter 1.11.1 Object-Based Data Models
  - The major database vendors presently support the object-relational data model, a data model that combines features of the object-oriented data model and relational data model.

Chapter 1.11.2 Semi-structured Data Models
  -Semi-structured data models permit the speciﬁcation of data where individual data items of the same type may have different sets of attributes.
  - XML

Chapter 1.12 Database Users and Administrators

Chapter 1.12.1 Database Users and User Interfaces
  - Four Types:
    1. Naïve users
    2. Application programmers
    3. Sophisticated users
    4. Specialized users

Chapter 1.12.2 Database Administrator
  - The functions of DBA include:
    - Schema definition
    - Storage structure and access-method deﬁnition.
    - Schema and physical-organization modiﬁcation.
    - Granting of authorization for data access.
    - Routine maintenance

Chapter 1.13 History of Database Systems
  - 1950s and early 1960s: Magnetic tapes were developed for data storage
  - Late 1960s and 1970s: Wide spread use of hard disk (Allowed for direct access to data)
  - 1980s: Relational model not used widely until IBM System R
  - Early 1990s: Many database vendors introduced parallel database products in this period
  - 1990s: Explosive growth of WWW.
  - 2000s: The emerging of XML and the associated query language XQuery as a new database technology. Data-mining techniques are now widely deployed

Chapter 1.14 Summary
  - Data model: a collection of conceptual tools for describing data, data relationships, data semantics, and data constraints.

Chapter 2.1 Structure of Relational Databases
  - A relational database consists of a collection of tables, each of which is assigned a unique name
  - In the relational model the term relation is used to refer to a table, while the term tuple is used to refer to a row. Similarly, the term attribute refers to a column of a table.
  - A data-manipulation language (DML) is a language that enables users to access or manipulate data.

Chapter 2.2 Database Schema
  - A relational schema consists of a list of attributes and their corresponding domains.

Chapter 3.1 Overview of the SQL Query Language
  - Originally called Sequel but renamed to Structured Query Language
  - The SQL language has several parts:
    - Data-deﬁnition language(DDL): DDL provides commands for deﬁning relation schemas, deleting relations, and modifying relation schemas.
    - Data-manipulation language (DML): provides the ability to query information from the database and work with tuples.
    - Integrity: integrity constraints, updates that violate integrity constraints are not allowed
    - View Definition
    - Transaction control
    - Embedded SQL and dynamic SQL (define how SQL can be embedded in languages like C, Java, C++)
    - Authorization: specifying access rights to relations and views.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XML DATA NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chapter 23.1 Motivation
  - The term markup refers to anything in a document that is not intended to be part of the printed output.
  - Benefits of XML when it's used to exchange data between organizations, and for storing complex structured information in ﬁles
    1. The presence of the tags makes the message self-documenting
    2. the format of the document is not rigid
    3. XML allows nested structures

Chapter 23.2 Structure of XML Data
  - An element is simply a pair of matching start-tag and end-tag
  - XML documents must have a single root element that encompasses all other elements in the document
  - The ability to nest elements within other elements provides an alternative way to represent information.
  - In general, it is advisable to use attributes only to represent identiﬁers, and to store all other data as sub-elements.
  - One ﬁnal syntactic note is that an element of the form <element></element> that contains no subelements or text can be abbreviated as <element/>
  - A document can have more than one namespace, declared as part of the root element.

Chapter 23.3.1 Document Type Deﬁnition
  - The document type deﬁnition(DTD) is an optional part of an XML document.
  - The keyword #PCDATA indicates text data
  - An attribute of type ID provides a unique identiﬁer for the element
  - The type IDREFS allows a list of references, separated by spaces.
  - An attribute of type IDREF is a reference to an element; the attribute must contain a value that appears in the ID attribute of some element in the document.

Chapter 23.3.2 XML Schema
  - Made to address deficiencies in DTD XMLSchemadeﬁnesanumberofbuilt-intypessuchasstring,integer,decimal date, and boolean.
  - Schema deﬁnitions in XML Schema are themselves speciﬁed in XML syntax
  - Key Ex:
  ```xml
    <xs:key name = “deptKey”>
        <xs:selector xpath = “/university/department”/>
        <xs:ﬁeld xpath = “dept name”/>
    </xs:key>
  ```
  - Foreign Key Ex:
  ```xml
    <xs: name = “courseDeptFKey” refer=“deptKey”>
        <xs:selector xpath = “/university/course”/>
        <xs:ﬁeld xpath = “dept name”/>
    </xs:keyref>
  ```
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RELATIONAL ALGEBRA NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SQL NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XPATH AND XQUERY NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XSLT NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RELATIONAL DESIGN THEORY NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UNIFIED MODELING LANGUAGE NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INDEXES AND TRANSACTIONS NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONSTRAINTS AND TRIGGERS NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
VIEWS AND AUTHORIZATION NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ON-LINE ANALYTICAL PROCESSING NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RECURSION IN SQL NOTES
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
